---
layout: interview
name: "Michael Hanchard"
occupation: "Professor"
location: "Philadelphia, Pennsylvania"
punchquote: "I am unsure how it would be possible to learn, really, learn, without some degree of discomfort,  without struggling to come to terms with negative thoughts about oneself, or others."
bio: "Professor Hanchard joins the University of Pennsylvania Department of Africana Studies from Johns Hopkins University Krieger School of Arts and Sciences. A scholar of comparative politics specializing in nationalism, social movements, racial hierarchy and citizenship, his books include Orpheus and Power: Afro-Brazilian Social Movements in Rio de Janeiro and São Paulo, Brazil, 1945-1988 and Party/Politics: Horizons in Black Political Thought. Professor Hanchard holds a B.A. in International Relations from Tufts University, an M.A. from the New School for Social Research, and a Political Science Ph.D. from Princeton University."
interview_date: "1/30/2016"
issue: "2"
topics:
  - "Activism"
  - "Academia"
  - "College"
  - "Education"
  - "Protest tactics"
---

**Would you mind telling me about yourself?**

I’m a faculty member at Johns Hopkins University, currently on leave, and I’m in the Africana Studies Department at the University of Pennsylvania. I’ve been involved most of my personal life but also in my professional life on issues related to state violence, particularly against black and brown populations. My early work focused on Black social movements and racial inequality in Brazil.

**How did you start doing work in these topics? How did you gravitate towards the kind of research that you do?**

I guess it started from growing up in New York City. I started out in the Bronx and went to elementary school and middle school in the Bronx. And the neighborhoods I grew up in were largely integrated neighborhoods...growing up in New York City the Latinos, the Puerto Ricans, the Eastern Europeans, [there was a] range of different people. And the people who constituted the communities I moved in and through were Caribbean subjects, so the black world that I was familiar with as a child also of Jamaican immigrants and Jamaican parents, was a sort of Caribbean world. So I got a sense of a variety of different black experiences at the same time I understood early on in my life the role that racism played, both at the level of state violence but also at the level of mob or popular violence, as well as in daily interpersonal interactions with people.

**Drilling down into what’s going on with race in higher education, do you have any particular thoughts on the kinds of protesting that’s been happening around the country over the past year?**

I think that these discussions are similar to other moments not just of student protest, but when national populations begin to ask questions. “Who are we as a people?” Not only, “Where have we come from?,” but “What do we aspire to as a people, and who are the symbols or the heroic figures, the heroic movements that we believe articulate the best, most democratic plural interest of the nation state?” Certainly, enough commentators on the right will say, either “All Lives Matter,” or “These things happened a century ago, get over it.” But we don’t say that about commemorations about the end of World War II or the tearing down of the Berlin Wall or the toppling of statues of Stalin and Lenin in the former Soviet Union. 

Debates in the U.S. about the naming of buildings and institutions after slaveholders have helped generate discussion about U.S. history and the centrality of slavery to the political economy of the United States, much in the way that students in contemporary South Africa have protested against the iconic images of Cecil Rhodes and other heroes of apartheid and white supremacy in South Africa.  Like the tearing down of the Berlin Wall or the toppling of statues of Stalin and Lenin, they are tearing down symbols of a previous order and creating the conditions, literally,  to construct new representations of a society and its history in the space where representations of the old order once stood.

There’s something about the disruptive tactics that are profoundly surrealist, in the true sense of the term. “Surrealism” is one of the most misused terms in U.S. English, that seeks to sum up artistic and aesthetic movements to describe something that is an unintelligible story; whereas the original term in the French was really a conjunction to convey a sense of the designed efforts of artists to create a superior reality and to underscore the absurdity of daily life. Artists like, in Spain, Luis Buñuel and Salvador Dali, did a range of different things to critique what they saw as the absurdity and oppression of daily life, so they committed acts to highlight the absurdity of daily life, to demonstrate how people could *see and live differently. *

So when you think about it, how absurd is it for a Trayvon Martin to be killed, walking on the way home from a convenience store, where he’s trailed by someone who is not a police officer, not a representative of state, who is advised by the representative of state not to pursue this young man; creates the conditions that make it possible to kill this young man and proclaim self-defense. How absurd is that? This is tragic violence unleashed by a deadly racist logic. It is also absurd. In the aftermath of Trayvon Martin’s killing, Eric Garner, Tamir Rice and unfortunately so many others, protesters throughout the country took over spaces in shopping malls, disrupted traffic on highways and other tactics and strategies aimed at disrupting the transportation and consumption cycles  of daily life. Sure they’re discomforting, sure they’re unsettling, and sure I, like most people, don’t like to be in traffic jams—but I think if it helps us to understand that what it means to be a Black or brown subject...we can begin to think about this in a larger sense.

**A question I have, coming from all the different demands of the different protest organizations and the schools, which will range from diversity training to questioning the legacy of Woodrow Wilson, or getting the word “master” taken out of the vocabulary at Yale or Harvard; I’m wondering what is the ideal experience for a black student in college? What do you see as the kinds of issues that they are running up against, that these protest movements are trying to repair or eradicate?**

I’m not sure I can answer a part of that for two reasons. One, I was a student a long time ago, in a previous century, so I think parts of my experience are very different (but I think there are also some similarities). But also, there’s such a diverse way—if you’re talking more specifically about black students at predominantly white elite research institutions, that’s something else, because there are a range of black people going to a range of different kinds of post-high school collegiate environments. Some of those can be quite rewarding and some not, for different kinds of reasons.

One thing I would suggest to the protesting students to consider, is that in many cases, the reality—particularly at these predominantly white elite institutions—is that there aren’t always going to be faculty members and administrators that look like you. And the idea that you are automatically in a better position to learn from people who look like you can end up being a trap if one is not careful...I mean, if you and I are having this conversation, my assumption would be that neither one of us would be big fans of Ben Carson, just because he’s Black and a celebrated surgeon—there has to be a lot more sophisticated politics than that. 

I think similarly you have to think about how to think about diversity intelligently at these kinds of institutions. And I think that what is at stake now is in some sense beginning to remove metaphors to describe and try to resolve institutional racism, because that’s what really is the issue. The issue is not diversity, per se. What has happened now, particularly in liberal white right-wing discourse at universities—and not just in the US, again, but in other places like Britain, Australia, and others—is that you have people now (administrators and the like) who talk about different types of diversity, and all types of diversity being equally worthy of consideration, so in some sense your Blackness or my Blackness is no more or no less important than the fact that you and I have glasses. Diversity and inclusion then become matters of  demographic and superficial representation, and not a means for people to have substantive discussions about institutional power and authority, course curricula, hiring and the development of programs and centers to augment what is being taught in disciplines. At a certain point, these kinds of questions about power, about representation, access, curriculum development; these are epistemic questions, they aren’t color of skin questions, per se. 

That being said, what I recall most from my days in graduate school at Princeton, I was one of two Black graduate students in the Political Science department at the time, and there were very few other Black graduate students in other departments, certainly in the social sciences and the humanities. And for the most part during my daily experience, interactions with Black people on campus at Princeton was usually custodial staff. And when I would begin to interact with and get to know and talk with many members of the custodial staff, I found that they had their own strategies for interacting with Black students.They could distinguish between the students who would identify with them; they could identify the students who didn’t want to have anything to do with them. 

There was one custodian, I’ll never forget, worked in Firestone library and pointed me to a closed stairwell where he would find black undergraduates, at least one per semester,  crying as they sat in the stairwell and declaring to him that  they could no longer cope at Princeton because of their feelings of isolation, loneliness, and  deep alienation, which led them to confide in the one or two people among the custodial staff —black people—that they felt would have some sense of what their experience was like. Such experiences are quite real, and I think that’s why it’s important that people develop support mechanisms amongst their fellow students to build a larger sense of community, characterized not only by their experiences in the classroom, but by larger histories of injustice and social struggle.

The middle-aged professor in me that also had these experiences also wants to say that some of the most important lessons I learned in life were not always fun and they weren’t always in the most comfortable settings and environments...for this reason I am unsure how it would be possible to learn, really, learn, without some degree of discomfort,  without struggling to come to terms with negative thoughts about oneself, or others. You have to understand what you’re signing up for  as we move through these kinds of institutions, and understand, even in the best of circumstances  students might have challenges. 

To think that at an institution like a Penn or a Johns Hopkins, a Harvard, Yale, or Princeton, or any number of institutions, that in a society that has an extensive and deeper history with racism as the US has, that somehow the college campuses or universities are going to be devoid of that, I think is wishful thinking. At the same time, can things be done certainly by an institution and by people and particularly students and faculty, administrators themselves to improve conditions on those campuses? I would say yes to that as well.